SECRETS IN CIPHER. 


number left unmade by him would still require a row of thirty-six 
figures to express it—so infinitesimal are fifty-two and a half millions 
of arrangements when compared with the almost infinite number of 
them which may be made out of thirty-two playing cards ; evidently, 
then, guess-work would not be of much help towards a solution of 
a message written in the “ Pack of Cards” cipher. 

The eniire population of the world is, approximately, 1500 
millions. Let every one of these men, women and children now 
begin to make the different arrangements of thirty-two cards, and 
let them work continuously for one hundred years at the rate of 
one arrangement per minute—deaths and births being suspended 
for a century for the sake of our experiment—certainly, the work 
of sorting thirty-two playing cards for one hundred years by the 
whole population of the world would have exhausted in 1996 some 
few of the possible arrangements: a mere trifle, however—only 
78,840,000,000,000,o00o—and thus the number &/¢ unmade would 
still require a row of thirty-six figures to express it. Therefore, as the 
world’s population ‘would not be of much use in doing this little 
piece of work with the thirty-two playing cards shown in No. 46, we 
will call in astronomy to help us with the sorting of these bits of 
pasteboard used for the “ Pack of Cards” cipher. 

There are about one hundred million stars visible at the eye- 
piece of the Lick telescope: let us assume that each of these 
stars contains a population one million times larger than that of the 
earth, and let us set at work all these populations of all these 
stars. Let us and our helpers in the stars work together at sorting 
these cards into different arrangements, at the rate of one arrange- 
ment per second for each person on the earth or in the stars. At 
the end of more than fifty-five thousand years from the present 
time (1896) we should by the aid of the vast populations of these 
one hundred million stars have exhausted all the possible arrange- 
ments of the thirty-two cards shown in No. 46. This is an 
extraordinary fact to lie so quietly hidden in the simple-looking 
illustration on page 608, but I do not ask you to be content 
with my bare statement—here is the calculation set out, so that 
any one who cares to check my results may do so. 

I may suggest that it will be found convenient to make this 
calculation by the aid of a table of logarithms ; although, if the four 
walls of a spare room be available—and also a pair of steps—the 
calculation may be worked on the wall-paper with a piece of black 
chalk or charcoal; the computer descending his ladder step by step 
and shifting it round the room as he proceeds. 

This “ Pack of Cards” cipher is in more ways than one a very 
remarkable device. 

The Foreign Office cipher shown in No. 47 is a combination of 
numerals, letters, and peculiarly formed symbols. The original is 
much larger than the piece of it here shown, but this piece will 
suffice to make the method quite clear. 

First, there is a choice of five different letters for the repre- 
sentation in a cipher message of each letter of the alphabet. The 


611 








Years. 
= 55,000 approximately. 


‘ x 60 x 24 x 365°25 x 1,500,000,000 ) mf (60 x 60 x 24 x 365°25 x 1,500,000,000 x 1,000,000 x conn) 


- 














612 THE PALL MALL MAGAZINE. 


five two-figure numbers at 
the left top corner of 
No. 47 were used to inform 
the reader of the cipher 
which row of letters had 
been substituted for the 
actual letters which origin- 
ally composed the real 
meaning of the consular 
despatch. For example, 
if the number 58 was 
prefixed to the cipher-letter 
the consul would then find 
the solution along the 
line of small letters which 
begins 7d As x, etc., and 
similarly for the other four 
lines of small letters. These 
numbers would be changed 
more than once in_ the 





No. 47.—Facsimile of a portion of a Foreign Office Cipher during the se? 
reign of George Ill, “Cipher for Consul Davison at Algiers,” Writing of one despatch, but 


ee Te ee Free. the necessary information 


as to a change was readily conveyed to Consul Davison by the insertion of the 
particular two-figure number connected with each one of the five lines of small 
letters shown in the upper part of No. 47. 

Then comes the reference to the peculiarly formed symbols—five of which 
may be seen in the middle and at the right of No. 47. “MB. The following 
Marks may sometimes be used to signify what is expressed opposite to them, 
without writing the Word at full Length, and this Mark + may serve for ¢4 which 
is so common in our Language.” There are in the original document several 
columns of these ‘ Marks,” and they denote short useful words that often occur 
in writing. 

Last, we have the reference to the use of numerals in the cipher despatches 
passing to and from Consul Davison at Algiers in the time of George III. “ W.B. 
The following Figures are to stand for the Words to which they are affixed opposite.” 
We see the meaning of the eight two-figure numbers at the bottom of No. 47, and 
many others were written on the original cipher. For example, 84 = Ships, 67 = 
Governor, 21 = fitted out, and 49 == Xebecks. ‘The last time I met this word Xedecks 
was about twenty years ago, when I was reading an early tale by Captain Marryat 
called Zhe Log of a Privateers-man. It was there spelt Xebegue; and for the 
information of those who do not know the meaning of this term, it may be 
interesting to state that an Xedec—to have a third spelling of it—-is a small 
three-masted vessel formerly much used by the Algerine pirates, and now used to 
a small extent in the Mediterranean: hence the reference to these vessels in the 
cipher of Consul Davison, who was stationed at Algiers just 116 years ago. 

The Heraldic cipher shown in Nos. 48, 49 and 50, is a very curious instance 
of emblematic cipher. I found it among some old Foreign Office papers of the 
eighteenth century, and I have shown it here because of its quaintness, and because 
the key itself (see No. 48) was disguised as a heraldic device. The twenty-four 
little tufts contained in the nine divisions of this shield denote the letters of the 








SECRETS IN CIPHER. 613 


alphabet—/ and V being omitted. For example, 
the top left-hand division of the shield contains 
the three letters 4, B, C; the centre division con- 
tains the two letters 47 and 1; the bottom right- 
hand division contains X, Y, Z. The amplification 
of this secret key, which is given in No. 49, shows 
us how to denote each of the three (or two) letters 
represented in each of the nine divisions of the 
shield by the three (or two) tufts which each 
division contains. 

In No. 49 the thick divisional lines of the 
shield in No. 48 are repeated in the form of the 
angles made by these divisional lines on the shield. 
Taking, for convenience, the top left-hand division 
of No. 48, which relates to the three letters 4, B 
and C, we copy the angle of this particular division 








. : . : No. 48 —The Heraldic Cipher. 
three times in No. 49: adding one tick for 4, two Eighteenth Century. 


ticks for B, and three ticks for C: and thus we sath ated 
see in No. 49 the cipher marks which stand for 4, &, and C respectively. 
Again, take the centre division of the shield in No. 48—which is a square: as 


this division contains only two letters 


(47 and JV), we enter it only twice in 
J jiu 


D lll le No. 49, adding one tick for AZ and two 


= a an oo SS oo ticks for 1, thereby obtaining the symbols 

ee ee ee ee for these two letters which were used in 

“1 “I 7 rT TT r 4 r the writing of the cipher message, a short 
specimen of which is shown in No. 50. 

SNe No. — a Ga Comparison of the cipher message 

+ Amplification of the secret Sey shown % NO. 8. in) No. so with the amplified key in 


No. 49 will show, by mere inspection, that the secret writing is: Plot known. Fly. 

Regarded as a mode of secret writing this Heraldic cipher is not a good one. 
Unlike some of the others, which baffle the decipherer even if he know the principle 
of the cipher, this one is most readily solved when once the method of it is known. 
No doubt the. peculiar form of the key in No. 48 was purposely designed in 
order to baffle the chance finder of it: but this key—even without the amplification 
of it which I have given for the sake of clearness—would not for long remain a 
mystery to any one accustomed to deal with cipher: there are too many tell-tale 
features about it—despite its heraldic appearance. Of course, the crown arrangement 
at the top of the shield is without meaning, and it was added merely to keep up 
the appearance of a heraldic device. The only significant parts of the shield are the 
twenty-four little tufts and the thick divisional lines. Ten minutes’ examination 
of the shield would suffice to expose its secret to any fairly competent decipherer, 
whilst the Hebraic-looking cipher letter shown in No. 50 would also soon be read 
even in the absence of the key. 

Here, then, is the explanation of the cipher-sentence with which I ended Part III. 
(see last month’s number 


of this Magazine).  In- 
spection of that sentence c al L "4 al (J ™ CJ 3 ~ i 


by the light of Nos. 49 





a a 





























: No. 50.—The Heraldic Cipher. 
and 50 will show that III, A cipher message: “ Plot known! Fly.” 








614 THE PALL MALL MAGAZINE. 








"7 its meaning 
is: You will 
read this sen- 
months and J duad to think of possible causes of your tence in less 
time than I 
spent in writ- 

. : , : . ing it. 
not be Surprised bo Kmour Chis. hy sBamath $ hotding nan 
oub awa. 3 stul hope Wy reane my pardow from the ciphers 


I have ever 


Det eashursh amd, fe aya sot may darhing. wife . Mart. - come across 
a 


—and_ they 
No. 51.—The Checker-board Cipher. Used by Russian Political Prisoners. are not a few 

I. Illustration of an open letter, passing the scrutiny of the Russian Cipher-bureau, but which 
contains the secret message : ‘‘ Plot discovered. Burn the Orloff papers in Moscow.” — the one 


that most 
excites my admiration for the masterly ingenuity displayed is that illustrated in 
Nos. 51, 52, 53, 54. It is the mode of secret writing used by Russian political 
prisoners, who, under certain conditions and restrictions, are sometimes permitted 
to send and to receive letters, all of which have to undergo the scrutiny of the 
officials attached to the Russian cipher bureau. 

In No. 51 we see an illustration of a letter which is apparently quite 
unsophisticated, both as regards the text of it and the handwriting, and which 
would not excite the suspicions of the most vigilant officer of the Russian cipher 
bureau. Their tests of the application of heat, or of chemical re-agents, might be 
stringently applied to this letter, for sympathetic or invisible ink plays no part in 
this clever device—and yet this simple-looking letter transmits a vitally important 
message to its addressee, through the hands and under the very eyes of the most 
subtle and experienced officials on the staff of the much-dreaded and merciless 
Russian police. 

When we take up a pen and write, we do not usually connect all the letters 
that compose each word: for example, as I write these words, I see that, 
involuntarily, I have written wswad/ly in two little groups of letters—wsu-ally : example 
in two parts—ex-ample: involuntarily in five parts—in-vo-lunt-ari-ly : etc. In this 
peculiarity of handwriting lies the secret of this most ingenious cipher: the slight 
and almost imperceptible “ breaks” that exist in most of the words shown in No. 51 
form the basis of a cipher which has never been surpassed for ingenuity and 
simplicity—for it rests upon a simple peculiarity that is common to the handwriting 
of the ma- 


dearest Hoa. de lotta has come fiom upa fr now four 


silone. Dur Soul died hore iw the mumes last wee, you will 






































jority of 3 5 ei as 4 :1I 4 2: a. 
ee MYD EARES TOL G ANO LETT ERHA SCOM E FROM YO UFOR NOWF OUR 
9eO ple 
or I ae ee a i Ee 2:8 f ee ee 
Western M ONT HSA NDID READT O T HINKO FPOS SI B LECAU S ESOF Y OU 
nationalities. 4 ae Te es ae a ex Se ee oss 4s 
het us RSIL ENCEO URPA UL DIE DHE REIN THEM IN ESL A STWEE KYO UWIL 
i h aig oii : 2 ee s 2 5 ty ae S . ue 
trace the LNOT BE SUR P RIS EDTO KN O WT H ISM YSTRE N G THI SHOLD I 
reading of 5 ; fie | ee ’ Se --s 2:3 
the secret NGOUT ANDI ST ILLH OPE TO RECE IVE MYP ARD ON FRO 
Cate ye tan : a . eee a 5 2: 7 
message con- MPET ERS BURG H AND TOA GAIN SEEMY DA _ RLINGWIFEALEXE 
tained in No. 
51 after the No. 52.—The ‘Checker-board” Cipher. Used by Russian Political Prisoners. 
Aa 


Il. The first stage of the process employed by the receiver of the cipher in order to read the 
letter has left secret message contained in No. 51. (For explanation, see text.) 








SECRETS IN CIPHER. 615 





the hands of the wretched prisoner—who, with much care, 





designedly “breaks” his words, in certain places—after it has § 35 = P | 34.= © 
passed the scrutiny of the cipher bureau, and when it reaches J ** ~ “| 4? = ® 
the hands of the unhappy wife. SOMERS ‘alesis 

In the first place, the wife begins to write out the letter as sh A - - i 
in No. 52, dividing into separate groups of 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 “i i a st ne > 
letters, the consecutive words of the original letter. Here I Jy; - s|3; =P 
must point out that unless the last stroke of the last letter §f13 = c}ur = 
of a word in No. 51 point upward, that letter is always 344 = of 35 = F 
understood to be connected with the first letter of the next 5! Vitis = £ 
word. For example, the y of my does not point upward, so 915 = = |42 = 8 
it is held to be connected with the d@ of dearest: as the first §47 ~ * | = 
“break” occurs after the @ of dearest, so the first little group JS ~ ~|* = 7 
written out by the wife is the Myp shown in No. 52, and . _— on _— 
she writes a 3 over this group because it contains three letters. ot = Ula @ - 
The next connected group of letters is given by the EARES §4. — g|43 = 
of dearest: this is accordingly entered in No. 52 and a 5 ff33 = nJ13 = c 
written above it: the last stroke of the ¢ of dearest in No. 51 44 = T | 245 ° 
does not point upward, so it is to be connected with the of J 23 = H}s2 = w 
of olga (a “break” occurs after this 7), and thus Tot is the 5 = = | 











next group written by the wife in No. 52. And so the first 
process of reading the secret message goes on; where the last No. 53 ~The “Checker- 


a board” Cipher. I1l. The 
stroke of the last letter of a word points upward (as in the second, and final, stage 


o of No in No. 51), that letter ends a cipher group as well . ee nee 
a at Z by the receiver of the 

as the word of which it is the last letter: see the ANo of cipher in order to read 
No. 52, the a of which forms part of this group of three the secret message : 
cas “Plot discovered. Burn 

letters, because the @ of e/ga does not point upward, and the Orloff Papers in 


because the full-stop after o/ga has no significance whatever to Moscow.’ 
the decipherer of the hidden message. 

Thus, the letter in No. 51 is re-written as in No. 52—more quickly than 
the process is described—the last significant group being the D A at the bottom 
of No. 52: the group of fourteen letters that follows this D a has no meaning to the 
wife, because she sees that no “break” occurs in No. 51 as regards these fourteen 
letters ... rding wife, Alexe. The last stroke of the g in darling does not point 
upward, nor does the e of wéfe, and so these last fourteen letters form one unmeaning 
group, which is only entered in No. §2 for the sake of completeness. 

I have mentioned that when the wife writes in No. 52 all the successive little 
groups of connected letters, she also writes above each 
group the numeral which represents the number of letters 
tf, |s|c |p |e] in each group: to these numerals she now turns in order 
to finally read the secret message. She separates these 
___|___|__] numerals into consecutive pairs (see the dots between each 
3. |™M/N|o| Pf pair in No. 52), and writes them in the form shown in 


























Eo oy lel No. 53: 35; 32, 34, etc. The wife then looks at her 
f |||“ checker-board,” illustrated in No. 54, and sees that ¢hirty- 
s v | w | x | y¥ |Z] five equals P, that thirty-one equals ZL, that ¢hirty-four 





, equals O, etc.: the unit-figures being at the top of No. 54 
No. 54.—The “Checker-board ’ ba ip uth ‘ 
Cipher. IV. The Key checker. and the ten-figures at the left-hand side of it. 
ene Spe tes : By thus referring to the “checker-board” given in 
v= 2@lt.: 00 = 4 - Of% . . . 
> ee ee No. 54, the secret message is easily read off, and it proves 














616 THE PALL MALL MAGAZINE. 





tobe: Plot discovered. Burn 
the Orloff papers in Moscow. 
@® 32" 15° 15° 44 32, 15. 24° 33° 35. II “42° 24° 43°34" 33° 32 34" 33° 14° Il 54 Truly, this cipher is a striking 
® T Y R A N T T Y R A N T rT Y R A N T fe Y R illustration of the inventive 
ingenuity that is bred by dire 
necessity, brought about by 
© 76°69'57°55'65°59°68'87'77'22'75 68°87 88°75'43'67'77'58°65'96 | injustice, tyranny, and cruelty. 
The four illustrations, Nos. 


No. 55.—Modern Numerical Cipher used by Russian Nihilists. This cipher 55, 56, 57 and 58, relate to 
is akin, in principle, to that used for diplomatic despatches, and it . ae coitia® 
defies detection if the key-word committed to memory by two corre- a mode of secret " ruamg, 
spondents be unknown to the would-be decipherer (TYRANT is the that is almost as ingenious 

D ( w 1 ° 
key-word here). J. The conversion of the message shown in line @® as that illustrated by Nos. 
into the cipher shown in line ©. (For explanation, sce text.) : : 
51-54, and which is abso- 


lutely indecipherable if the key-word agreed upon by two correspondents be 
unknown. This numerical cipher is used by the Russian political prisoners who are 
suspected or convicted of complicity in nihilism: by the use of this inscrutable 
cipher these prisoners defy the ingenuity of the Russian cipher bureau even if letters 
written in this cipher fall into the hands of the officials—for this method is not, 
of course, used for “open” letters which the writer knows will be examined by the 
cipher bureau. 

Here is the explanation of this cipher. No. 55 shows in line © the message to 
be communicated to a friend, who knows that the word 7 YRAWNT is the key-word 
agreed upon for these cipher messages. In order to convert this message into 
cipher, the writer enters in line © of No. 55 the numerical equivalent of each of 
the letters of his message, which numbers are obtained by reference to the “lettered- 
square” shown in No. 58: thus, 47 = 32, E = 15, T = 44, etc. Having 
completed line © in No. 55, the writer fills in line @ by writing the key-word 
TYRANT along the line, until all the spaces occupied by his message are equally 
occupied by the key-word or by part of it: thus, in the present instance, as 
there are twenty-one letters in the message, he writes the key-word three times and 
one-half—see line @ in No. 55. Then, in line @, he enters the numbers that 
correspond to the letters of the word 7 YRAN7, which, as for line ©, he takes from 
the lettered-square given in No. 58. The conversion of the message into cipher is 
completed in line ©, which is obtained by adding together the numbers in lines 
2 and 4 shown in No. 55. This, then, is the cipher to be sent away, and No. 56 
shows the form in which it would be sent; and it may safely be said that no 
person—not even one who is acquainted with this mode of cipher—-can decipher the 
meaning of No. 56 unless he know that the key-word committed to memory is 
TYRANT. All the usual aids to solving cipher are useless here, for the same 
letter of the real message is represented in the cipher by numbers that are different. 
For example, in No. 56, the m of mee? is re- 
presented by 76, the m of me by 65, the m of 
Monday by 43, the first e of meet by 69, the 76° 69° 57° 55°65 "59°68 
second e of meet by 65, the e of me by 59, 
etc. It will now be perceived what an 87°77° 22°75 ° 68° 87°88 
admirable cipher this is, for no clue is given 
by it as to the hidden meaning: in some 75°43 °67°77 58° 65 * 96 
numerical and other ciphers, the frequency 
of the sign that stands for the letter e will eR : 

: ‘ 3 No. 56.—Modern Numerical Cipher used by Russian 
often give a clue, as will also the sign Nihilists. II. The cipher letter. 


sts driv so wae ire gee 


©) 44°$4°42°11°33°44°44°54°42°11'33°4444°54°42°11'33°44°44°54°42 



































SECRETS IN CIPHER. 617 











that represents the’ double 
4, and there are many 
other details for which 
the practised decipherer , 
is keenly on the alert: © 76°69°57°55°65°59°68°87°77°22°75 68°87 °88°75°43°67°77'58°65'9C° 
here he is completely [[@) 44'54'42°11'33°44'44'54°42°11'33'44'44'54'42'11'33'44'44'54'42" @ 
baffled, for the numerical ® 32°15°15"44°32°15'24°33°35°11'42°24°43'34'33'32°34'33'14'11'54° @ 
equivalents of the same I@mee TM E‘ILN'P aR i S°O N'M oN oD ay’ @ 
letter of the alphabet vary t— 


in nitely in ) No. 57-—Modern Numerical Cipher used by Russian Nihilists. J1l, The 
defi ns die the course of reading of the cipher letter shown in No. Ll. by means of the key-word 


—— KEY WORD —— 
TYRANT 


44°54°42°11'33'45° 











a single message, and this TYRANT, and dy reference to the lettered-square shown in No. IV. 
protean nature of the cipher Fr nets ae a 


is its most characteristic feature—and yet it is simplicity itself. 

When the recipient of the cipher wishes to read the secret message, he proceeds 
as is set out in No. 57: he writes in line © the numbers which compose the 
cipher, and which he copies from No. 56; in line © he writes numbers that 
correspond to the letters of the key-word 7 YRANT, and which numbers he obtains 
from the lettered square in No. 58; he then subtracts the numbers in line © from 
those in line @, and writes the result in line @; and, finally, in line © he 
enters the letters which correspond with the numbers in line @, and which letters 
he reads at a glance from the lettered-square given in No. 58: he then reads off 
the message, Meet me in Paris on Monday. 

It is interesting to note that the lettered-square shown in No. 58, and which 
plays the second réé in this cipher, as it does also in the other Russian cipher 
illustrated in Nos. 51—-54, is a device that is extensively used by the inmates 
of Russian prisons. Many of the prisoners are so expert in the use of this 
square that they do not need to write it upon paper or upon the wall of their 
cells, but it is pictured in the mind and employed in various ways. For example, 
a prisoner wants to communicate with the man.in the cell next to his own, who, 
almost for a certainty, is also acquainted with the use of this square—he wishes 
to ask, Who are you? and he raps on the wall between the two cells, thus: 
5 Traps a pause, 2 raps a pause (W); 2 raps a pause, 3 raps a pause (/7); 
3 Taps a pause, 4 raps a pause (QO); and so on, until the question has been 
rapped out on the wall (see No. 58). Again, if two prisoners are in sight of each 
other, they will word this lettered-square by the aid of holding up 1, 2, 3, 4 or 
5 fingers in the proper sequence; and, at night, if a candle and a handkerchief 
be available, a conversation is similarly carried on by alternately obscuring and 
disclosing the light of the candle with the handkerchief until 
3 | +|5 the sentence is completed. 

‘ere There are various other ingenious ways of utilising this 

-——|— — — lettered-square ; and as the Russian intellect is quick and 
2u' |° |") 1) S47 subtle, and as many of these prisoners are men of high 
L|M | N ©} PT] intelligence, it can readily be perceived what an invaluable 
44e |Rr|s tr x] thing to these prisoners is this little square, with its twenty- 
five letters and its five numbers: it is no exaggeration to say 

that the mental activity and the interest produced by using 
No. 58—Modern Numerical this square for purposes of communication has saved many 
Cipher used by Russian / 


Nihilists. IV. The lettered- Wretched prisoner from madness or from suicide. 

square. (11=A:12=B: 

18=C: et.: 5=X: 

bh = Y: 65 =Z. And now I—the showman—have shown you—the lookers- 





2 


I 





























wn 
< 
< 
< 
~ 
< 
NS 























618 THE PALL MALL MAGAZINE. 


on—nearly all that I have gathered together about these secret ciphers. There are 
still two or three more devices, such as inserting between the visible lines of writing on 
a letter-page another message, written in ink that remains invisible until chemically 
treated or until heated ; but this is too well known a device to be worthy of special 
illustration. There is also the “Dictionary” cipher, of which the Duke of Portland 
has a specimen. In this device two precisely similar dictionaries were numbered 
down the margin of each page, a different number being written against each 
word printed on the pages of the dictionary. So that when using this cipher, a 
writer merely turned up the page of the book that contained the printed word 
he wanted, and then wrote—not the word, but the number written against it in 
the margin of his dictionary. A simple process, that merely had to be repeated 
by the addressee of such a cipher-letter to enable him, by the aid of his prepared 
dictionary, to at once read the secret message sent to him. 

The concluding sentences of Parts I., II., and III. have each been written in 
cipher and later on explained. Here is the concluding sentence of Part IV., 
and last, of this account of Secrets in Cipher. It has been written by means of 
the device illustrated and exactly explained in Nos. 55 to 58, but the key-word 
TYRANT there used has not been used for this concluding sentence; therefore 
the meaning of the cipher which now follows will never be solved by any one. The 
“box,” which for us has been unlocked to let out the cipher secrets of past 
centuries, has now closed and firmly shut its fastenings for one hundred years of 
future time. 


Joun Ho tr SCHOOLING. 





0200606 600000 
S2Go0oSo00 00000 



























HE = second-class 
railway carriage 
in which I jour- 

neyed from Verona to Mantua 

was quite old enough to have been 
in existence in the days of Romeo, 

and at first I was inclined to assume 
that it was the identical carriage in which 
he fled from the vengeance of the Verona 
government after his “ difficulty,” as the Americans would 
cali it, with Tybalt. But it was not long before I perceived 
that neither Romeo, nor any one else, would ever have thought of the 
Verona-Mantua railway as a means of flight. Romeo was compelled to 

travel rapidly, and therefore he either walked or rode to Mantua. Nobody takes 
the Verona-Mantua train who has not abundance of leisure, for, next to the 

South-Eastern train between Cannon Street and Charing Cross, it is the slowest 

railway train in Europe. 

The country between Verona and Mantua is flat, with the exception of a range 
of low hills westward of the line. It is thoroughly irrigated, and every inch of 
ground is cultivated. The average Italian, who estimates the beauty of a landscape 
by its productiveness per acre, regards this part of Lombardy as one of the most 
beautiful parts of Italy. It is, however, by no means an uninteresting region, for 
it has been the scene of a dozen hard-fought battles. The train passes within 
sight of the monuments erected on the battle-fields of Solferino and Custozza, and 
within a short distance of those of Goito and Curtatone. Custozza has been a 
fatal field for Italy, for it was there that the Piedmontese were beaten by Radetsky 
in 1848; and the Italians were beaten by their own general, the brave and honest 
La Marmora, in 1866. A more loyal and chivalrous patriot than La Marmora 
never lived ; but when, to use the words of one of his contemporaries, he “ knocked 
his stupid head against the Quadrilateral ” at Custozza, he demonstrated that a general 
may have every personal and civic virtue, and be at the same time the deadliest 
foe of the army which he commands. 

The approach to Mantua is not unlike the approach to Venice. The town is 
nearly surrounded by a broad lake made by the expansion of the Mincio; and as 


o1g 











620 THE PALL MALL MAGAZINE. 


the train rolls over the long bridge, and the traveller watches the fishing-boats 
with their painted sails glide between him and the tall red towers of the city, he 
is filled with admiration or the picturesqueness of Mantua. Suddenly a chorus of 
thousands of frogs breaks on his ear, and a dozen mosquitoes settle on his brow, 
and he begins to wonder if it is possible for a foreigner to sleep in Mantua without 
contracting fever and perilling his soul by midnight address to the mosquitoes. 

The cabmen had struck the day I arrived in Mantua, and the open space in 
the rear of the station was deserted, except by the omnibus of the Hotel Croce 
Verde. When I reached the hotel, and found that no cab could be had, I hired 
the omnibus, for a drive through the town. It was a small omnibus, with a double 
share of the maddening rattle which usually characterises that sort of vehicle. The 
driver conducted me to all the points of interest in the city, and I was regarded 
by the crowds in the street with something of the admiration which a Roman 
general driving in his chariot on the day of his triumph must have awakened. 

I should never have known half as much about Romeo as I now know, had 
it not been for the builder of that omnibus, who had ornamented the interior with 
a large mirror occupying all the space at the forward end of the vehicle. It 
was a maddening mirror, for it constantly showed me Mantua and its inhabitants 
reversed. Looking into the mirror I seemed to be constantly approaching places 
which I was in reality leaving behind. A dozen times a pretty Mantuan girl would 
flash her eyes at me from the mirror, and when I eagerly leaned out of the window, 
expecting that the omnibus would presently overtake and pass her, I found that 
it had already left her so far behind that I could not identify her. To a man 
possessed as I was at the time with the unholy thirst for snapshot photographs, this 
sort of thing was extremely annoying ; and finally, the mirror gave me a headache 
as well as a lesion of the temper. I began to see strange sights in it, which I 
could not see from the windows of the omnibus, no matter how wildly I might 
twist my neck. At times the Mantuan streets seemed centuries older in the mirror 
than they seemed to my unassisted eyes. After a while I understood the meaning 
of this strange phenomenon. That mirror was not merely reversing the vision of 
the modern Mantua, but it was giving me glimpses of the Mantua of the year 1300 
or thereabouts—the Mantua that Romeo saw and Shakespeare dreamed of. I hold 
that mirror responsible for the odd adventure which happened to me during my 
stay in Mantua, and on the whole, at this distance of time, I am rather grateful 
to the builder of that omnibus, though his mirror did embitter my life during that 
long drive through, across, and around Mantua. 

I had taken with me one of those dictionaries of elegant quotations written by 
the indefatigable scissors of Mr. Augustus Hare, and put forth by him under the 
pretext that they are guide-books. Mr. Hare remarks that when you “tread the 
deserted and silent streets in the older town, and the five squares of the deserted 
palace, so solemn in their utterly decaying and mouldering splendour, you feel as 
if you were dead. . . . All is placid, stagnant decay. . . . All is damp, mossy, and 
mouldy. When a human figure comes stealthily round a corner it startles you 
that anything can be living here besides yourself.” This is all very pretty, but 
unfortunately it is very far from being true. The chief streets of Mantua are 
crowded, and the side streets are no more silent and deserted than are the side 
streets of Milan or Florence. I looked in vain for the grass and-moss and decay 
of which Mr. Hare speaks. I did, however, note that the city was well supplied 
with electric lights, and in three or four of the shops, as I drove past, I caught 
sight of a man standing with the handles of a telephone at his ears, and that 














WITH ROMEO IN MANTUA. 





“It was a maddening mirror.” 


agonised expression of face which the telephonic listener invariably assumes. 
Mantua is a busy, and for Italy a prosperous town, and it ought, in common 
with many other Italian towns, to demand an immediate apology and retraction 
from Mr. Hare. 

But most of us who have visited Italy know by this time that Mr. Hare’s 
relations with Italy are, so to speak, strained. He is the only one of the great 
powers of Europe that has persistently refused to recognise the Italian kingdom. 
When he has occasion to speak of the Italian Government he is careful to call it 
the “Subalpine,” or the “ Sardinian,” or the “ Piedmontese” Government. He is 
a staunch apologist for Papal rule in Rome and Austrian rule in Lombardy, and 
there is nothing that the Italian Government has done that does not meet with 
his warm disapproval. Naturally, this is very painful to all patriotic Italians. It 
is said that when a new English Ambassador comes to Rome, the first thing that 
the King says to him is, “Tell us, for the love of Heaven! how can Italy secure 
the recognition of Mr. Hare?” To Mr. Hare’s vision the busy, teeming streets 
of Mantua are deserted and grass-grown now that the “Sardinian” flag floats over 
the town. And then, perhaps, when Mr. Hare visited Mantua, the inhabitants 
had notice of his coming, and shut themselves up. This would explain his belief 
that the streets are deserted, though it would hardly explain the moss and grass 
which he fancies that he found. 

After my drive through Mantua, I went back to the hotel for dinner. I can 











622 THE PALL MALL MAGAZINE. 





Castella di San Giorgio, Mantua, 


speak freely of the Croce Verde, for it no longer exists as an hotel. The proprietor 
has marched with the times, and, yielding to a thirst for electric lights and modern 
drainage, has closed, the Croce Verde and opened a new and modernised hotel, 
where the Cook’s tourist can obtain his plain boiled potatoes and the rest of his 
accustomed cookery. I am not going to describe my dinner, though it will long 
linger in my memory as a typically Italian dinner—than which no higher praise could 
be given to it. The dining-room was large and cool, for vines shaded the windows, 
and the stone floor was sprinkled assiduously by a small boy, who was clearly a 
gardener’s assistant, and who scrutinised the corners of the room with the evident 
expectation of finding fresh salads in the act of sprouting. There were two waiters 
in dress coats of the time of Romeo, and they were assisted by the landlord himself, 
who wore a morning-jacket as a badge of superior rank. The wine was the full-bodied 
Grignolino, guiltless of water, and perhaps a trifle too demonstrative in boasting of 
near kinship to vinegar. It was a wholesome, satisfying dinner, and when I had 
finished my bit of Parmegiano, and lighted my Minghetti cigar, I was able to reply 
with some little enthusiasm to the waiter’s kindly question as to how I had enjoyed 
the “kitchen ” of the Croce Verde. 

“I suppose Romeo stopped at this hotel when he came to Mantua ?” I remarked. 

“ Precisely,” replied the waiter. ‘The Signor Romeo always comes here to dine ; 
and behold him! at this very moment!” 

As he spoke a young lieutenant of dersag/ieri entered the room, and hanging up 
his hat and sabre, seated himself with a bow at my table. 

“This,” said the waiter, “is the Signor Lieutenant Romeo dei Montecchi.— 
Signor lieutenant! this egregious foreigner was at this very moment demanding of 
your news. Permit that I present him to you. The Signor is an Englishman of 
the most distinct.” 





WITH ROMEO IN MANTUA. 623 





“** Behold him !'” 


The young man smiled an irresistible smile, that at once made me feel that we 
were old acquaintances ; and, making me a military bow, with a sharp click of his 
meeting boot-heels, said that he was charmed to meet me. 

“And so,” I said, after the preliminary exchange of social inanities, “you are 
teally the Romeo of whom so much poetry has been written ? ” 

“The same, at your service,” he replied, with his black eyes twinkling. “I had 
to leave Verona for a little while after that unfortunate affair with the poor Signor 
Tibaldo, but I am in no hurry to return. Mantua is a second country to me.” 

“ And the Signorina Giulietta?” I asked. ‘Is she waiting for you at Verona?” 

“Oh yes!” he replied. ‘ At this precise moment she has gone to the Exhibition 
at Milan with her governess, but she will return in a few days.” 

“T never knew before that you were in the Jdersaglter’,” I remarked, somewhat 

















624 THE PALL MALL MAGAZINE. 


doubtfully ; for the presence of Romeo in Mantua several centuries after his death at 
Verona, as reported by Shakespeare, somewhat puzzled me. 

“That is strange,” he answered. “I have been seven years in my regiment, and 
the Signor Shakkaspeera ought to have known it.” 

“Shakespeare seems to have made several mistakes,” I continued. ‘“ He said that 
both you and the Signorina Giulietta were dead : I trust that this was a mistake ?” 

“Entirely a mistake,” he replied. “Your Shakkaspeera said that we had 
committed suicide by taking poison. Why should I take poison merely because 
one pretty girl was dead? Mantua is full of pretty girls. Only a man with the 
spleen, who had never seen our Italian girls, and had never dined at the Croce Verde, 
would dream of taking poison.” 

I spent an hour at the dinner-table with the young lieutenant, and then accepted 
his invitation to take a stroll with him. By this time I had become fully reconciled 
to the presence of Romeo in Mantua in the year 1894. I remembered the magic 
mirror of the omnibus, and decided that it was responsible for the visible presence of 
Romeo. Had it not shown me curious medizval streets when I was driving through 
the town—streets that were quite invisible when I looked out of the window in search 
of them? If the mirror could do this, it could easily bring back the people of the 
Mantua of the fourteenth century. 

The chief street was a blaze of electric light as we turned into it from the courtyard 
of the Croce Verde. Before the caffés groups of Romeo’s brother-officers were sitting, 
mingled with grave and respectable townsmen, fulfilling the daily duty of discussing 
the political situation. ‘The sidewalk, under the heavy arcades, was crowded with men 
and women, and the beauty of the latter struck me as affording an easy explanation of 
Romeo’s acquiescence in his exile from Verona. It was amusing to see how delight- 
fully the young man swaggered down the street. I learned then for the first time that 
it is possible for an officer of dersaglieri, provided he is young and handsome, to 
swagger in a way that is not only entirely unobjectionable, but positively attractive. 
He had a whispered compliment or an admiring glance for every pretty woman 
whom we passed, and I doubt if even the severest of English spinsters could have been 
angry with him, had it been possible for him to whisper to her that she was sémpatica. 

As we passed through the Piazza Dante, with its statue of a humpbacked boy in 
a nightshirt seated under a Gothic canopy on the side of a wall, and called for some 
inexplicable reason a statue of Vergil, I asked Romeo if his family was still at feud 
with the Capulets. 

He laughed scornfully. “Signore!” he said, “my father is associated with the 
Marchese dei Capuletti in business. They have a contract for lighting the Corso with 
electricity, and they play dominoes together every night. Your Shakkaspeera was 
shamefully wrong in accusing us of quarrelling. I had to call out my old friend 
Tibaldo, because of certain remarks made by him which I do not at this moment 
recollect, on a subject which I have now forgotten, but there was really no quarrel 
between us.” 

“There is another thing I would like to ask, if I have your permission,” I pursued. 
“Shakespeare says you were in love with some one the very night you met the 
Signorina Giulietta, and that you instantly forgot your first love. I never could under- 
stand how one could change his affections so suddenly: tell me, did Shakespeare tell 
the truth in this matter?” 

“For once he did,” replied my friend. “ But what is there strange about my 
having been in love, and why should you doubt it? I have been in love many, many 
times, and hope to live to be in love many more. It is the chief amusement of life, 








WITH ROMEO IN MANTUA. 


Piazza Dante, Mantua. 
my dear friend, and I cannot think what you English are made of that you are content 
with a single love.” 

“ And you have fallen in love since you loved Giulietta ?” I cried. 

“That was some time ago,” he replied ; “and what would life have been to me if 
I had loved none but her? Ah! there is such a beautiful woman here in Mantua 
at this very moment. If you saw her you would say, ‘Romeo! if you do not love 
that woman you will be no more my friend.’ ” 

We were in the great Piazza Sordello, where stands the Ducal Palace once 
inhabited by the Gonzagas. The moon seemed poised on a corner of the summit of the 
lofty “ Tower of the Cage,” and in the middle of the Piazza rose a marble monument 
to the martyrs of Italian freedom. And here, in the moonlight.that fell impartially 

VoL. VIIT.—No. 36. 40 








“'* This bridge,’ said Romeo, ‘always pleased me.'” 


620 








WITH ROMEO IN MANTUA. 627 





Piazza Sordello, 


on medizval tower and modern statue, was Romeo, cheerfully telling me of his 
faithlessness to Juliet! It was becoming exasperating, the way in which the centuries 
were mixing themselves together. 

“€om2 on,” cried Romeo: “we must go down to the bridge of San Giorgio, and 
hear the frogs at their singing.” 

We passed through a low archway, and, after skirting the broad, dry ditch that 
surrounds the ancient Gonzaga Castle, we reached the shore of the lake. ‘Thousands 
of frogs were croaking, as they croaked in the days of Vergil and the nights of 
Dante. It is at least two thousand years since this hoarse concert began, and never 
for a single moment has it ceased, either day or night. 

“Listen to them,” said Romeo. ‘When I first came to Mantua they annoyed 
me. Now I like them. Just so you English people have croaked about constancy 
and the like ever since your Shakkaspeera described me as foolish boy. But. the 
world takes its way in spite of the frogs.” 

Romeo was becoming philosophical, which was totally out of accord with my 
conception of him, and I hurried him away from the neighbourhood of the frogs. 
He presently took the lead, and in a few moments he had brought me to the great 
bridge called the Argine Mulino, which crosses the lake, and combines in_ itself 
the varied functions of bridge, dam, mill, and granary. The water rushing under 
its arches turns a dozen vast water-wheels, and these in turn set in motion the 
millstones in a dozen stone mills which occupy all of one side of the bridge. 

“This bridge,” said Romeo, “always pleased me. It was built in the twelfth 
century, and so you see that it is even older than I.” 

“ Let us sit down,” I said; “I want to ask you more about Verona, and 
your life there. Here is a stone bench. Tell me, now, do you expect to marry the 
Signorina Giulietta ?” 





= 
3 
= 
= 
5 
a 
oJ 
= 
5 
3 
— 
& 
3s 
Ss 














WITH ROMEO IN MANTUA. 629 

“Am I quite mad?” he replied. “I must tell you that the Capuletti are no 
longer rich. The Marchese lost his fortune in building new houses in Verona, which 
there is no one to buy. Therefore the Signorina has no dowry, and of course 
marriage is impossible. It is a pity, for I love her dearly ; but what would you have ? 
Perhaps if her papa makes another fortune with the electric light we shall marry, 
but at present we must content ourselves with loving—which, my friend, is much less 
expensive and far more pleasant than marrying.” 

“And what does Friar Lawrence say to this?” I demanded, becoming indignant 
at Romeo’s want of sentiment. 

“Ah! you mean the excellent Don Lorenzo? Yes: Shakkaspeera has written 
truly of him, for he isa good man. He says that we would be mad to think of 
marriage, and he advises the Signorina to marry my friend Benvoglio. He is a good 
devil, Benvoglio, and has a nice little property. Yes, I am of the opinion that Don 
Lorenzo’s advice should be followed.” 

*‘T suppose that Mercutio was also a good devil?” I remarked. 

“T know whom you mean,” said Romeo, “though you pronounce his name 
after your English fashion. Yes, he is not altogether bad, but oh! my friend! 
he is so tiresome : I am glad to be in Mantua, where he cannot talk to me.” 

“T thought he was dead,” I said. 

“Oh, no! he still lives. He is an advocate, and he means to go to Parliament. 
That is why he talks everybody deaf and dead.” 

We walked back into the town. I liked Romeo, and in certain aspects admired 
him, but I wished that he had remained dead in the tomb with Juliet. In that case he 
would have been so delightfully romantic ; whereas now I found him as prosaic as 
everything else in this prosaic century. 

We came back through the quiet streets, where the sabre of Romeo clanked on 
the pavement, and the stray and belated cats fled in fright. The cat, as every 
naturalist knows, is extremely superstitious, and without doubt the Mantuan cats 
recognised Romeo as a belated ghost. 

“Tt is such a pity!” I exclaimed, speaking to myself. 

“You were saying ?” hinted Romeo delicately. 

I could not, in cold blood, inform the young man that it seemed a pity 
that he had not remained dead ; so I merely remarked, “It is a pity that the ‘lean 
apothecary ’ was an invention of Shakespeare. I should like to see him.” 

“You mean the man who is said to have sold me the poison? ‘The story is 
partly true and partly false. Shakkaspeera mistook a wine merchant for an apothecary, 
that was all.” 

“ And it was a very natural mistake,” I added, “ considering the sort of wine that 
Shakespeare probably drank in his earlier days.” 

“We will go and see the wine merchant,” said Romeo. ‘“ His wine is excellent, 
and I suspect that Shakkaspeera may have seen me in the shop one day when | 
had perhaps drank the least thought too much.” 

He showed me the way to a little wine shop. It might have been the shop of 
the lean and obscure apothecary, for it was insignificant in size, and situated in an 
obscure street. But the wine was certainly good, and there did not seem to be 
the least suggestion of any deadly poison in the big-bellied, genial-looking bottles 
and flasks, that filled the shelves. 

Over the wine I asked Romeo when he intended to return to Verona, and if 
he meant to spend his evenings under Juliet’s balcony. He explained that he was 
in disgrace, rusticated, so to speak, for thirty days, on account of his duel with Tybalt, 











THE PALL MALL MAGAZINE. 





630 























but that he should be on duty with his regiment in Verona in the course of another 
week. As to Juliet, he rejected with scorn the suggestion that he should pass his 
evenings under her balcony. No! he would meet her frequently on her way to and 
from church, and they could look into each other’s eyes. Then, too, he could 
correspond with her by the help of her nurse, who, he maintained, was not a nurse 
at all, but only her German governess. “Some day,” he added, “she will be 
married, and then we can see each other as often as we please. Marriage is a most 
excellent thing for a girl when she has no dowry and her lover is poor. After 
marriage she can meet him and no one can find fault with her.” 

I felt that Romeo’s morals had deteriorated in the last five hundred years, but it 
was not worth while to remind him of the fact. He saw me home to my hotel, 
and begged me to call on him should I ever come to Verona. Then he kissed me 
on both cheeks, and after making me a bow that would have filled any Romeo ever 
seen on the English stage with hopeless envy, he went away. 

I left Mantua early the next morning. The landlord had gone to inspect his 
new hotel, and the waiter who had introduced me to Romeo was invisible. To 
this day, I have never been able satisfactorily to explain my meeting with Romeo. 
Did I dream the whole affair, or did some jovial young officer practise a jest at my 
expense, or had the magic mirror brought back to me across the long centuries the 
Romeo of whom Shakespeare wrote ?. I do not know that I am required to guess the 
true answer, and so I leave it, as it always will be to me, a mystery. 


W. L. ALDEN 





Statue of Vergil. 























h 
[A “a 
a I=} @ 


Mm Amn An Ann 


C= 
a 



































“IS CHRISTIAN REUNION POSSIBLE?” 
IF 


S Christian Reunion possible? The question itself ought to be an impossible 
one to those who believe in Christianity. But since the question is raised, 
and that, as no one can doubt, in perfect good faith, I will try to answer it in 

the sense in which it is asked, and to express the sentiments of some who think 
that Reunion is not only possible but attainable, not only a pious aspiration but a 
result to be laboured for in the strength of a con