Dorabella Chiper Solution
author Alessandro Boatto
email: alessandroboatto1@gmail.com

Abstract
«The Enigma I will not explain – its “dark saying” must be left unguessed, and I warn you
that the apparent connection between the Variations and the Theme is often of the
slightest texture; further, through and over the whole set another and larger theme “goes”,
but is not “played”.»
- Sir Edward Elgar
«There is nothing to be gained in an artistic or musical sense by solving the enigma of any
of the personalities; the listener should hear the music as music, and not trouble himself
with any intricacies of “programme”. To me, the various personalities have been a source
of inspiration, their idealizations a pleasure – and one that is intensified as the years go
by.»
-Sir Edward Elgar
Proof and solution
One of the most famous compositions of Sir Edward Elgar are the Enigma Variations. Sir Edward
Elgar made it clear that there is another hidden theme that is not heard, and is hidden within the
message in Fig.1.
The Main Theme is :

Message and solution :

Fig.1

1- The message in Fig.1 is made up of three rows and a signature.
2- Each row represents a work by Sir Edward Elgar before the year 1897.
3- The first row at the top is made up of 29 symbols and represents the work 29 (Op.29).
4- The second row in the middle is made up of 31 symbols and represents the work 31 (Op.31).
5- The third row below is made up of 27 symbols and represents the work 27 (Op.27).

Op.29 is titled "The light of life"
Op.31 is titled "After"
Op.27 is titled "The dance"

The hidden message is :

The light of life after the dance

Another proof : The title and the symbols

19 Symbols

Nineteenth symbols and the title is : Nineteenth Saturday Concert

Conclusion
«There is nothing to be gained in an artistic or musical sense by solving the enigma of any
of the personalities; the listener should hear the music as music, and not trouble himself
with any intricacies of “programme”. To me, the various personalities have been a source
of inspiration, their idealizations a pleasure – and one that is intensified as the years go
by.» - Sir Edward Elgar

Sir Edward Elgar

Miss Dora Penny (Dorabella)

